Be aware that, if metformin is contraindicated or not tolerated, repaglinide is both clinically effective and cost effective in adults with type 2 diabetes
However, discuss with any person for whom repaglinide is being considered, that there is no licensed non-metformin-based combination containing repaglinide that can be offered at first intensification.
Known risk factors for these conditions, including increased age, should be carefully evaluated before treatment: see the manufacturers' summaries of product characteristics for details
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) guidance (2011) advises that 'prescribers should review the safety and efficacy of pioglitazone in individuals after 3–6 months of treatment to ensure that only patients who are deriving benefit continue to be treated'.
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Last updated May 2017 1 Recommendations
The wording used in the recommendations in this guideline (for example, words such as 'offer' and 'consider') denotes the certainty with which the recommendation is made (the strength of the recommendation)
Initial drug treatment
Treatment with a single non-insulin blood glucose lowering therapy (monotherapy)
First intensification of drug treatment
Treatment with 2 non-insulin blood glucose lowering therapies in combination (dual therapy)
Second intensification of drug treatment
Treatment with either 3 non-insulin blood glucose lowering therapies in combination (triple therapy) or any treatment combination containing insulin
Adopt an individualised approach to diabetes care that is tailored to the needs and circumstances of adults with type 2 diabetes, taking into account their personal preferences, comorbidities, risks from polypharmacy, and their ability to benefit from long-term interventions because of reduced life expectancy.
Reassess the person's needs and circumstances at each review and think about whether to stop any medicines that are not effective.
Take into account any disabilities, including visual impairment, when planning and delivering care for adults with type 2 diabetes.
Offer structured education to adults with type 2 diabetes and/or their family members or carers (as appropriate) at and around the time of diagnosis, with
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Last updated May 2017 annual reinforcement and review
Explain to people and their carers that structured education is an integral part of diabetes care.
Ensure that any structured education programme for adults with type 2 diabetes includes the following components:
It has specific aims and learning objectives, and supports the person and their family members and carers in developing attitudes, beliefs, knowledge and skills to self-manage diabetes.
It is quality assured, and reviewed by trained, competent, independent assessors who measure it against criteria that ensure consistency.
Ensure the patient-education programme provides the necessary resources to support the educators, and that educators are properly trained and given time to develop and maintain their skills.
Provide an alternative of equal standard for a person unable or unwilling to participate in group education.
Ensure that all members of the diabetes healthcare team are familiar with the patient-education programmes available locally, that these programmes are integrated with the rest of the care pathway, and that adults with type 2 diabetes and their family members or carers (as appropriate) have the opportunity to contribute to the design and provision of local programmes.
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Provide individualised and ongoing nutritional advice from a healthcare professional with specific expertise and competencies in nutrition.
Provide dietary advice in a form sensitive to the person's needs, culture and beliefs, being sensitive to their willingness to change and the effects on their quality of life.
Emphasise advice on healthy balanced eating that is applicable to the general population when providing advice to adults with type 2 diabetes
Encourage high-fibre, low-glycaemic-index sources of carbohydrate in the diet, such as fruit, vegetables, wholegrains and pulses; include low-fat dairy products and oily fish; and control the intake of foods containing saturated and trans fatty acids.
For adults with type 2 diabetes who are overweight, set an initial body weight loss target of 5–10%
Individualise recommendations for carbohydrate and alcohol intake, and meal patterns
Reducing the risk of hypoglycaemia should be a particular aim for a person using insulin or an insulin secretagogue.
Advise adults with type 2 diabetes that limited substitution of sucrose-containing foods for other carbohydrate in the meal plan is allowable, but that they should take care to avoid excess energy intake.
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
When adults with type 2 diabetes are admitted to hospital as inpatients or to any other care setting, implement a meal planning system that provides consistency in the carbohydrate content of meals and snacks.
For recommendations on lifestyle advice, see the NICE guidelines on: preventing excess weight gain, weight management, obesity, physical activity, smoking: brief interventions and referrals, stop smoking services, smoking: harm reduction, and smoking: acute, maternity and mental health services.
For recommendations on bariatric surgery for people with recent-onset type 2 diabetes, see the section on bariatric surgery for people with recent-onset type 2 diabetes in the NICE guideline on obesity.
Measure blood pressure at least annually in an adult with type 2 diabetes without previously diagnosed hypertension or renal disease
Offer and reinforce preventive lifestyle advice.
For an adult with type 2 diabetes on antihypertensive drug treatment when diabetes is diagnosed, review blood pressure control and medications used.
Make changes only if there is poor control or if current drug treatment is not appropriate because of microvascular complications or metabolic problems.
Repeat blood pressure measurements within: 1 month if blood pressure is higher than 150/90 mmHg 2 months if blood pressure is higher than 140/80 mmHg 2 months if blood pressure is higher than 130/80 mmHg and there is kidney, eye or cerebrovascular damage.
Provide lifestyle advice (diet and exercise) at the same time.
Provide lifestyle advice (see section in this guideline and the lifestyle interventions section in hypertension in adults [NICE guideline CG127]) if blood
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Monitor blood pressure every 1–2 months, and intensify therapy if the person is already on antihypertensive drug treatment, until the blood pressure is consistently below 140/80 mmHg (below 130/80 mmHg if there is kidney, eye or cerebrovascular damage).
First-line antihypertensive drug treatment should be a once-daily, generic angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
African or Caribbean family origin, or women for whom there is a possibility of becoming pregnant.
The first-line antihypertensive drug treatment for a person of African or
Caribbean family origin should be an ACE inhibitor plus either a diuretic or a generic calcium-channel blocker.
A calcium-channel blocker should be the first-line antihypertensive drug treatment for a woman for whom, after an informed discussion, it is agreed there is a possibility of her becoming pregnant.
Do not combine an ACE inhibitor with an angiotensin II-receptor antagonist to treat hypertension.
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Check for possible adverse effects of antihypertensive drug treatment – including the risks from unnecessarily low blood pressure.
Do not offer antiplatelet therapy (aspirin or clopidogrel) for adults with type 2 diabetes without cardiovascular disease.
For guidance on the primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults with type 2 diabetes, see the NICE guidelines on cardiovascular disease and myocardial infarction.
HbA1c measurement and targets
Measurement
In adults with type 2 diabetes, measure HbA1c levels at: 3–6-monthly intervals (tailored to individual needs), until the HbA1c is stable on unchanging therapy 6-monthly intervals once the HbA1c level and blood glucose lowering therapy are stable.
Use methods to measure HbA1c that have been calibrated according to
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Investigate unexplained discrepancies between HbA1c and other glucose measurements
Involve adults with type 2 diabetes in decisions about their individual HbA1c target
Encourage them to achieve the target and maintain it unless any resulting adverse effects (including hypoglycaemia), or their efforts to achieve their target, impair their quality of life.
Offer lifestyle advice and drug treatment to support adults with type 2 diabetes to achieve and maintain their HbA1c target (see section )
For adults with type 2 diabetes managed either by lifestyle and diet, or by lifestyle and diet combined with a single drug not associated with hypoglycaemia, support the person to aim for an HbA1c level of 48 mmol/mol ( %)
For adults on a drug associated with hypoglycaemia, support the person to aim for an HbA1c level of 53 mmol/mol ( %).
In adults with type 2 diabetes, if HbA1c levels are not adequately controlled by a single drug and rise to 58 mmol/mol ( %) or higher: reinforce advice about diet, lifestyle and adherence to drug treatment and support the person to aim for an HbA1c level of 53 mmol/mol ( %) and intensify drug treatment.
Consider relaxing the target HbA1c level (see recommendations and )
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Last updated May 2017 on a case-by-case basis, with particular consideration for people who are older or frail, for adults with type 2 diabetes: who are unlikely to achieve longer-term risk-reduction benefits, for example, people with a reduced life expectancy for whom tight blood glucose control poses a high risk of the consequences of hypoglycaemia, for example, people who are at risk of falling, people who have impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia, and people who drive or operate machinery as part of their job for whom intensive management would not be appropriate, for example, people with significant comorbidities.
If adults with type 2 diabetes achieve an HbA1c level that is lower than their target and they are not experiencing hypoglycaemia, encourage them to maintain it
Be aware that there are other possible reasons for a low HbA1c level, for example, deteriorating renal function or sudden weight loss.
For guidance on HbA1c targets for women with type 2 diabetes who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant, see the NICE guideline on diabetes in pregnancy.
Self-monitoring of blood glucose
Take the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) At a glance guide to the current medical standards of fitness to drive into account when offering self-monitoring of blood glucose levels for adults with type 2 diabetes.
Do not routinely offer self-monitoring of blood glucose levels for adults with type 2 diabetes unless: the person is on insulin or there is evidence of hypoglycaemic episodes or the person is on oral medication that may increase their risk of hypoglycaemia while driving or operating machinery or
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Last updated May 2017 the person is pregnant, or is planning to become pregnant
For more information, see the NICE guideline on diabetes in pregnancy.
Consider short-term self-monitoring of blood glucose levels in adults with type 2 diabetes (and review treatment as necessary): when starting treatment with oral or intravenous corticosteroids or to confirm suspected hypoglycaemia.
Be aware that adults with type 2 diabetes who have acute intercurrent illness are at risk of worsening hyperglycaemia
Review treatment as necessary.
If adults with type 2 diabetes are self-monitoring their blood glucose levels, carry out a structured assessment at least annually
The assessment should include: the person's self-monitoring skills the quality and frequency of testing checking that the person knows how to interpret the blood glucose results and what action to take the impact on the person's quality of life the continued benefit to the person the equipment used.
Drug treatment
Recommendations in this section that cover dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) mimetics and sulfonylureas refer to each of these groups of drugs at a class level.
For adults with type 2 diabetes, discuss the benefits and risks of drug treatment, and the options available
Base the choice of drug treatment(s) on: the effectiveness of the drug treatment(s) in terms of metabolic response
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Last updated May 2017 safety (see Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency [MHRA] guidance) and tolerability of the drug treatment(s) the person's individual clinical circumstances, for example, comorbidities, risks from polypharmacy the person's individual preferences and needs the licensed indications or combinations available cost (if 2 drugs in the same class are appropriate, choose the option with the lowest acquisition cost).
Rescue therapy at any phase of treatment
If an adult with type 2 diabetes is symptomatically hyperglycaemic, consider insulin (see recommendations – ) or a sulfonylurea, and review treatment when blood glucose control has been achieved.
Initial drug treatment
Offer standard-release metformin as the initial drug treatment for adults with type 2 diabetes.
Gradually increase the dose of standard-release metformin over several weeks to minimise the risk of gastrointestinal side effects in adults with type 2 diabetes.
If an adult with type 2 diabetes experiences gastrointestinal side effects with standard-release metformin, consider a trial of modified-release metformin.
Algorithm for blood glucose lowering therapy in adults with type 2 diabetes
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
In adults with type 2 diabetes, review the dose of metformin if the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) is below 45 ml/minute/ m2:
Prescribe metformin with caution for those at risk of a sudden deterioration in kidney function and those at risk of eGFR falling below 45 ml/minute/ m2.
In adults with type 2 diabetes, if metformin is contraindicated or not tolerated, consider initial drug treatment  with: a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor or pioglitazone or a sulfonylurea.
In adults with type 2 diabetes, do not offer or continue pioglitazone  if they have any of the following: heart failure or history of heart failure
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Treatment with sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors ,  may be appropriate for some adults with type 2 diabetes if metformin is contraindicated or not tolerated (see NICE's guidance on canagliflozin, dapagliflozin and empagliflozin as monotherapies for treating type 2 diabetes).
First intensification of drug treatment
In adults with type 2 diabetes, if initial drug treatment with metformin has not continued to control HbA1c to below the person's individually agreed threshold for intensification, consider dual therapy with: metformin and a DPP-4 inhibitor or metformin and pioglitazone or metformin and a sulfonylurea.
In adults with type 2 diabetes, if metformin is contraindicated or not tolerated and initial drug treatment has not continued to control HbA1c to below the person's individually agreed threshold for intensification, consider dual therapy  with: a DPP-4 inhibitor and pioglitazone or a DPP-4 inhibitor and a sulfonylurea or pioglitazone and a sulfonylurea.
Treatment with combinations of medicines including sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors  ,  may be appropriate for some people with type 2 diabetes; see the NICE guidance on canagliflozin in combination therapy for treating type 2 diabetes, dapagliflozin in combination therapy for treating type 2 diabetes and empagliflozin in combination therapy for treating type 2 diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Second intensification of drug treatment
In adults with type 2 diabetes, if dual therapy with metformin and another oral drug (see recommendation ) has not continued to control HbA1c to below the person's individually agreed threshold for intensification, consider either: triple therapy with: metformin, a DPP-4 inhibitor and a sulfonylurea or metformin, pioglitazone and a sulfonylurea or starting insulin-based treatment (see recommendations – ).
If triple therapy with metformin and 2 other oral drugs (see recommendation ) is not effective, not tolerated or contraindicated, consider combination therapy with metformin, a sulfonylurea and a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) mimetic for adults with type 2 diabetes who: have a BMI of 35 kg/m2 or higher (adjust accordingly for people from black, Asian and other minority ethnic groups) and specific psychological or other medical problems associated with obesity or have a BMI lower than 35 kg/m2and: for whom insulin therapy would have significant occupational implications or weight loss would benefit other significant obesity-related comorbidities.
In adults with type 2 diabetes, if metformin is contraindicated or not tolerated, and if dual therapy with 2 oral drugs (see recommendation ) has not continued to control HbA1c to below the person's individually agreed threshold for intensification, consider insulin-based treatment (see recommendations – ).
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
In adults with type 2 diabetes, only offer a GLP-1 mimetic in combination with insulin with specialist care advice and ongoing support from a consultant-led multidisciplinary team .
Treatment with combinations of medicines including SGLT-2 inhibitors ,  may be appropriate for some people with type 2 diabetes; see the NICE guidance on canagliflozin in combination therapy for treating type 2 diabetes, dapagliflozin in combination therapy for treating type 2 diabetes, dapagliflozin in triple therapy for treating type 2 diabetes and empagliflozin in combination therapy for treating type 2 diabetes.
Insulin-based treatments
When starting insulin therapy in adults with type 2 diabetes, use a structured programme employing active insulin dose titration that encompasses: injection technique, including rotating injection sites and avoiding repeated injections at the same point within sites continuing telephone support self-monitoring dose titration to target levels dietary understanding
When starting insulin therapy in adults with type 2 diabetes, continue to offer metformin for people without contraindications or intolerance
Review the continued need for other blood glucose lowering therapies .
Start insulin therapy for adults with type 2 diabetes from a choice of a number of insulin types and regimens:
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Consider starting both NPH and short-acting insulin (particularly if the person's
Consider, as an alternative to NPH insulin, using insulin detemir or insulin glargine  if: the person needs assistance from a carer or healthcare professional to inject insulin, and use of insulin detemir or insulin glargine  would reduce the frequency of injections from twice to once daily or the person's lifestyle is restricted by recurrent symptomatic hypoglycaemic episodes or the person would otherwise need twice-daily NPH insulin injections in combination with oral glucose-lowering drugs.
Consider pre-mixed (biphasic) preparations that include short-acting insulin analogues, rather than pre-mixed (biphasic) preparations that include short-acting human insulin preparations, if: a person prefers injecting insulin immediately before a meal or hypoglycaemia is a problem or blood glucose levels rise markedly after meals.
Consider switching to insulin detemir or insulin glargine  from NPH insulin in adults with type 2 diabetes: who do not reach their target HbA1c because of significant hypoglycaemia or who experience significant hypoglycaemia on NPH insulin irrespective of the level of
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Monitor adults with type 2 diabetes who are on a basal insulin regimen (NPH insulin, insulin detemir or insulin glargine ) for the need for short-acting insulin before meals (or a pre-mixed [biphasic] insulin preparation).
Monitor adults with type 2 diabetes who are on pre-mixed (biphasic) insulin for the need for a further injection of short-acting insulin before meals or for a change to a basal bolus regimen with NPH insulin or insulin detemir or insulin glargine , if blood glucose control remains inadequate.
Treatment with combinations of medicines including SGLT-2 inhibitors ,  may be appropriate for some people with type 2 diabetes; see the NICE guidance on canagliflozin in combination therapy for treating type 2 diabetes, dapagliflozin in combination therapy for treating type 2 diabetes and empagliflozin in combination therapy for treating type 2 diabetes.
For guidance on insulin delivery for adults with type 2 diabetes, see the insulin delivery section in the NICE guideline on type 1 diabetes.
Think about a diagnosis of gastroparesis in adults with type 2 diabetes with erratic blood glucose control or unexplained gastric bloating or vomiting, taking into account possible alternative diagnoses [2009, amended 2015]
For adults with type 2 diabetes who have vomiting caused by gastroparesis, explain that: there is not strong evidence that any available antiemetic therapy is effective some people have had benefit with domperidone , erythromycin  or metoclopramide . the strongest evidence for effectiveness is for domperidone , but prescribers must
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
For treating vomiting caused by gastroparesis in adults with type 2 diabetes: consider alternating use of erythomycin  and metoclopramide consider domperidone  only in exceptional circumstances (if domperidone is the only effective treatment) and in accordance with MHRA guidance.
If gastroparesis is suspected, consider referral to specialist services if: the differential diagnosis is in doubt or persistent or severe vomiting occurs.
For guidance on managing painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy in adults with type 2 diabetes, see the NICE guideline on neuropathic pain in adults.
Autonomic neuropathy
Think about the possibility of contributory sympathetic nervous system damage for adults with type 2 diabetes who lose the warning signs of hypoglycaemia. [2009, amended 2015]
Think about the possibility of autonomic neuropathy affecting the gut in adults with type 2 diabetes who have unexplained diarrhoea that happens particularly at night [2009, amended 2015]
When using tricyclic drugs and antihypertensive drug treatments in adults with type 2 diabetes who have autonomic neuropathy, be aware of the increased likelihood of side effects such as orthostatic hypotension.
Investigate the possibility of autonomic neuropathy affecting the bladder in adults with type 2 diabetes who have unexplained bladder-emptying problems.
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
In managing autonomic neuropathy symptoms, include specific interventions indicated by the manifestations (for example, for abnormal sweating or nocturnal diarrhoea).
For guidance on preventing and managing foot problems in adults with type 2 diabetes, see the NICE guideline on diabetic foot problems.
For guidance on managing kidney disease in adults with type 2 diabetes, see the
NICE guideline on chronic kidney disease in adults.
Offer men with type 2 diabetes the opportunity to discuss erectile dysfunction as part of their annual review.
Assess, educate and support men with type 2 diabetes who have problematic erectile dysfunction, addressing contributory factors such as cardiovascular disease as well as possible treatment options.
Consider a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor to treat problematic erectile dysfunction in men with type 2 diabetes, initially choosing the drug with the lowest acquisition cost and taking into account any contraindications.
Following discussion, refer men with type 2 diabetes to a service offering other medical, surgical or psychological management of erectile dysfunction if treatment (including a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor, as appropriate) has been unsuccessful.
On diagnosis, GPs should immediately refer adults with type 2 diabetes to the local eye screening service
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Explain the reasons for, and success of, eye screening systems to adults with type 2 diabetes, so that attendance is not reduced by lack of knowledge or fear of outcome.
Discussions should include precautions for driving.
Depending on the findings, follow structured eye screening by: routine review in 1 year or earlier review or referral to an ophthalmologist.
Arrange emergency review by an ophthalmologist for: sudden loss of vision rubeosis iridis pre-retinal or vitreous haemorrhage retinal detachment.
Arrange rapid review by an ophthalmologist for new vessel formation.
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Be aware that, if metformin is contraindicated or not tolerated, repaglinide is both clinically effective and cost effective in adults with type 2 diabetes
However, discuss with any person for whom repaglinide is being considered, that there is no licensed non-metformin-based combination containing repaglinide that can be offered at first intensification.
Known risk factors for these conditions, including increased age, should be carefully evaluated before treatment: see the manufacturers' summaries of product characteristics for details
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) guidance (2011) advises that 'prescribers should review the safety and efficacy of pioglitazone in individuals after 3–6 months of treatment to ensure that only patients who are deriving benefit continue to be treated'.
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) guidance (2016) warned that serious, life-threatening, and fatal cases of diabetic ketoacidosis have been reported rarely in people taking an SGLT-2 inhibitor (a substantial proportion of the cases concerned off-label use in people with type 1 diabetes, which is not recommended)
The MHRA advised that healthcare professionals should test for raised ketones in people with ketoacidosis symptoms who are receiving an SGLT-2 inhibitor, even if their plasma glucose levels are near-normal.
Be aware that the drugs in dual therapy should be introduced in a stepwise manner, checking for tolerability and effectiveness of each drug.
It advises that if the combination is used, people should be observed for signs and symptoms of heart failure, weight gain, and oedema
Pioglitazone should be discontinued if any deterioration in cardiac status occurs.
The recommendations in this guideline also apply to any current and future biosimilar product(s) of insulin glargine that have an appropriate marketing authorisation that allows the use of the biosimilar(s) in the same indication.
The MHRA advises that prescribers should take into account the overall safety profile of domperidone, and in particular its cardiac risk and potential interactions with other medicines (such as erythromycin), if there is a clinical need to use it at doses or durations greater than those authorised
The prescriber should follow relevant professional guidance, taking full responsibility for the decision
Informed consent should be obtained and documented
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management (NG28) conditions#notice-of-rights)
